What was to give in Spanish?
Dar.
Dar, good.
Now dar is irregular in this
point in the past in that whilst it's an R verb, it behaves like an er ear verb.
It's the only
verb that has this particular peculiarity, the only verb that just switches sides like this in this point in the past.
So how would you say I gave
D.
Good D I D.
And he gave, she gave, it gave, Ufummel gave.
Dio.
And where is the?
Sorry, Dio.
Dio.
Good.
We gave?
Dimos.
Good.
How would you say he gave me?
Medeo.
Good.
Medio.
And he gave me it.
Melodio.
He gave us it.
He gave it to us.
Nos lodio.
Good.
He didn't give it to us.
No, nos lodio.
Good.
I gave it to you.
Speaking informally, I gave you it.
Did we do it?
I gave.
Ah, I gave.
So your mind went to you gave.
Huh?
Yes.
So how do you control that?
How do you stop that happening?
Cutting it up.
Okay, so your first thought, what is it?
Your first thought when you want to build I gave you it, I gave it to you
I gave.
Exactly.
And then the rest flows off.
So I gave you it, speaking informally
Te lodi.
Good.
So it's not a new thing for us to have two of these small words together.
Nos lo te lo melo.
What we didn't see so far is having two words together, two of these small words together, where both of them begin with L.
That's because in Spanish, when that happens
a phonetic change occurs.
So for example, if I wanted to say I gave it to him, it should be le
But and this isn't about grammar, it's about phonetics, it's about sound.
Spanish doesn't like that.
Spanish doesn't like the sound of those two L's together.
LE lo.
Doesn't like it
So where we would have le law les la los
Any combination of l-l together with these small words, the first one is going to turn into se.
So another se.
But a totally different use and it's not changing any meaning, it's just a phonetic issue.
So this means that lello, less lo become cello.
So how would you say I gave it to him?
Selodi.
Good.
How would you say I gave it to you guys or to them?
Celodi.
Selodi.
The same.
So it is really just a phonetic change.
It's got nothing to do with the different meanings that we saw for Se like himself and
herself that we saw before.
It's just a phonetic change because Spanish doesn't like having these two els together.
Se ll, I gave it to you guys, I gave it to them, I gave it to him, I gave it to her, I gave it to you for mal.
How would you say I gave them to him?
Perfect, well done.
Celos D.
So of course this means that there could be many ambiguities.
So now is a good time to look at how we can make these clarifications generally, not just in this structure, but generally.
So for example, how would you say I gave him something?
I gave him something
Led di algo.
Le di algo.
So in this case we might want to clarify as well, because of course le di algo could mean I gave him something, I gave her something, I gave you formal something.
So how do we make that clarification?
It's simple.
We repeat the whole sentence and then we say afterwards
To him to her.
For example, Ledi algo ael.
Ledialgo Aya.
How would you clarify I gave something to you speaking formally?
Le di algo a usted.
Good.
So actually we're repeating.
No, we don't get rid of that le because we put austed, which is excellent for the learner, because it means you don't have to worry about changing the structure of the sentence when you're clarifying.
using this uh to clarify because you're repeating now we saw before we didn't have this situation for example we could say me lo compra he buys it
for me or lo compra para mi.
We don't repeat the me there.
But with this a with this a that we use to clarify, we will always repeat.
Le dialgo a él.
It's like an afterthought.
Le dialgo a ella.
You don't have to go back and restructure because you've made that clarification.
So going back to the situation when we have two laws together, what was to sell?
Vender.
And how would you say I sold?
Vendi.
And I sold it.
Lovendi.
And I sold him it.
Very good.
It would be lelovendi, but we don't like this sound in Spanish, so we just say selovendi.
But of course, selovendi is very ambiguous.
Most of the time we're gonna know what we're talking about because of the context.
Usually when we're speaking, we mentioned already what or who we're speaking about.
But if you want to clarify it, if you want to be emphatic
You can add on afterwards to him.
So how would you do that?
I sold it to him
Selovendi ael.
Good.
So we're just repeating Selovendi Ael.
This is probably because this eye is actually quite flexible.
We can use it to clarify, but not just
for the preposition to.
For example, if I say me lo compra ami and I use this a to emphasize me, a mi
to me, literally, could mean from me, he buys it from me, or it could mean for me, he buys it for me, me lo compra a mi.
So this I is a bit special.
We're using it
to clarify and it can replace or represent other prepositions other than to which is its literal translation and because it has this special use we are always repeating with ah
Whereas, as we saw before, with the other prepositions, we are not repeating.
Me lo compra, lo compra para mi.
No repetition there.
But if we use a to make this clarification, we repeat
Me lo compra a mi.
So you repeat, se lo vendi a él.
How would you say I sold it to her?
Selo vendi a ella.
What if you wanted to say I sold them to her?
Se los vendi a ella.
Very good.
What if they were feminine things that you sold to her?
Se las vendi a ella.
Good.
So what if actually you sold them to them?
Not to her.
So now we're going to say I sold them, those feminine things, to them.
Mixed or masculine group
Celos venti feminine things.
Sorry.
Celas venti a ellos.
Celas vendi a ellos.
Good.
What was to send?
Enviar.
Good.
How would you say he sent?
Envio.
He sent me it
Melo envio.
Good.
He sent us it.
Nos le sorry.
Nos lo envio.
He sent you it speaking informally.
Te lo envio.
Perfect.
So we have no problem with melo, noslo, del law, but of course we can't have lelo.
So if you want to say he sent it to her, how will it be?
Se lo envio.
Good.
You want to clarify?
Yeah.
Go ahead.
Aella.
Good.
Se lo envio aia.
And of course we could clarify he as well.
El se lo envio aia.
So it's like you have this base structure, celo mvio, and you can clarify around it El Cello MVO.
Se lo envió a ella.
El se lo envio a ella.
But what is not changing there is that bit se lo envio.
He sent it to them.
Se lo envió a ellos.
Good, then what if it was to you guys?
He sent it to you guys
Se lo envió a ustedes.
He didn't send it to you guys yet.
It's no cello envio a ustedes and I forgot yes.
All way.
Todavía.
Todavía, good.
So no se lo envio a ustedes todavía.
No se lo envió todavía a ustedes.
Could go that way around as well.
I don't know if I sent it to him.
Mnon se envier lo envier
Good no se si se lo envie excellent so when we're using this for clarification or emphasis we are repeating
Celo envie ayel.
So we repeat when we use this ah for emphasis or for clarification, but if we use another preposition like para, for example, lo compre para usted.
Lo compre para ti.
Then we don't repeat.
So these very specific details of language I don't want anybody to
worry or stress about remembering or memorizing them.
Remember, as long as you are actively listening and analyzing the Spanish that you expose yourself to, even if you forget it now, you will
Notice it again for yourself through listening, analyzing, comparing with the skills that we've developed during this course.
So our focus is to understand it, not to memorize it.